.TH UNIBETAPREP 1 "2019 Jan 26"
.SH NAME
unibetaprep \- Pre-process Beta Code files for \fBbeta2uni\fP(1)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B unibetaprep
[\-i \fIinput_file.pre\fP] [\-o \fIoutput_file.beta\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBunibetaprep\fP(1)
reads a document encoded using Beta Code that may contain
special character codes from the full Beta Code of the
Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG) specification, and converts it
to a Beta Code file that has those special characters converted
to Unicode escape sequences.  This departs from the traditional
encoding of those special characters in favor of Unicode code
point assignments.
.PP
Beta Code is an ASCII-only encoding scheme most commonly used
for digital representation of polytonic Greek.
.PP
Beta Code has become a widely-adopted standard for encoding
classical Greek.  It was developed by David Packard in the 1970s
and adopted by the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG) Project at
the University of California, Irvine shortly thereafter.
This encoding was later adopted by the Perseus Project in the
1980s (originally at Harvard University, now at Tufts University)
and by many other collections of classical and Koine Greek.
Today, the TLG corpus alone contains over 100 million words
from classical to Byzantine Greek.
.PP
The TLG uses uppercase Latin letters; the Perseus Project uses
lowercase.
\fBunibetaprep\fP(1)
will accept either.
.PP
Many classicists who use Beta Code have been actively involved
in The Unicode Standard, with evolving recommendations for mapping
between Beta Code and Unicode.
\fBunibetaprep\fP(1)
provides a capability for GNU/Linux users who wish to convert
Beta Code texts to Unicode.
.PP
The most notable range of special characters in the TLG
specification is the complete range of Byzantine Musical
Symbols, in the Unicode range U+1D000 through U+1D0FF,
inclusive.  This range corresponds to the TLG special
character encodings "#2000" through "#2245", respectively.
If a character sequence in the TLG Beta Code specification
corresponds to a Unicode glyph or glyph combination,
\fBunibetaprep\fP should handle the translation correctly.
.PP
Most of these Beta Code sequences consist of a "#", "%",
"<", ">", "[", or "]" character followed by one or more
decimal digits.  Sequences corresponding to idiosyncratic
Beta Code glyphs are not translated to Unicode.  The Beta Code
quotation mark sequences "1, "2, "4, and "5 are converted to
represent Unicode code points U+201E, U+201C, U+201A, and U+201B,
respectively.  For other special code sequences, consult the
.I TLG Beta Code Quick Reference Guide,
or examine the flex program source in file unibetaprep.l.
.PP
The output of \fBunibetaprep\fP is designed to provide the
input to \fBbeta2uni\fP(1), which then produces UTF-8 Unicode
output.
.PP
Note: Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and TLG are registered trademarks
of the University of California.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 12
\-i
Specify the input file. The default is STDIN.
.TP
\-o
Specify the output file. The default is STDOUT.
.PP
Sample usage:
.PP
.RS
unibetaprep \-i \fImy_input_file.pre\fP \-o \fImy_output_file.beta\fP
.RE
.PP
The output file, \fImy_output_file.beta,\fP can then be used
as input for \fBbeta2uni\fP(1) for conversion into a UTF-8
Unicode document.
.SH FILES
ASCII text files using Beta Code to encode polytonic Greek.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBbeta2uni\fP(1),
\fBuni2beta\fP(1),
\fBlibunibetacode\fP(3),
\fBunibetacode\fP(5)
.SH AUTHOR
.B unibetaprep
was written by Paul Hardy.
.SH LICENSE
.B unibetaprep
is Copyright \(co 2018, 2019, 2020 Paul Hardy.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.SH BUGS
No known bugs exist.
