.TH BETA2UNI 1 "2018 Jun 23"
.SH NAME
beta2uni \- Convert a polytonic Greek document from Beta Code to UTF-8
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B beta2uni
[\-b] [\-i \fIinput_file.utf8\fP] [\-o \fIoutput_file.beta\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBbeta2uni\fP(1)
reads a document encoded using Beta Code and converts it to
UTF-8 Unicode.  Beta Code is an ASCII-only encoding scheme most
commonly used for digital representation of polytonic Greek.
.PP
Beta Code has become a widely-adopted standard for encoding
classical Greek.  It was developed by David Packard in the 1970s
and adopted by the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG) Project at
the University of California, Irvine shortly thereafter.
This encoding was later adopted by the Perseus Project in the
1980s (originally at Harvard University, now at Tufts University)
and by many other collections of classical and Koine Greek.
Today, the TLG corpus alone contains over 100 million words
from classical to Byzantine Greek.
.PP
The TLG uses uppercase Latin letters; the Perseus Project uses
lowercase.
\fBbeta2uni\fP(1)
will accept either.
.PP
Many classicists who use Beta Code have been actively involved
in The Unicode Standard, with evolving recommendations for mapping
between Beta Code and Unicode.
\fBbeta2uni\fP(1)
provides a capability for GNU/Linux users who wish to convert
Beta Code texts to Unicode.
.PP
Note: Thesaurus Linguae Graecae and TLG are registered trademarks
of the University of California.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 12
\-b
Begin the UTF-8 output file with the UTF-8 encoding of
the Unicode Byte Order Mark, U+FFFE.  This is
.I not
the default.
.TP
\-i
Specify the input file. The default is STDIN.
.TP
\-o
Specify the output file. The default is STDOUT.
.PP
Sample usage:
.PP
.RS
beta2uni \-i \fImy_input_file.beta\fP \-o \fImy_output_file.utf8\fP
.RE
.SH FILES
ASCII text files using Beta Code to encode polytonic Greek.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBunibetaprep\fP(1),
\fBuni2beta\fP(1),
\fBlibunibetacode\fP(3),
\fBunibetacode\fP(5)
.SH AUTHOR
.B beta2uni
was written by Paul Hardy.
.SH LICENSE
.B beta2uni
is Copyright \(co 2018, 2019, 2020 Paul Hardy.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.SH BUGS
No known bugs exist.
